---
author: angusferraro
comments: true
date: 2012-10-26 15:37:59+00:00
layout: post
slug: the-age-we-made
title: The Age We Made
wordpress_id: 146
categories:
- popular science
tags:
- anthropocene
- environment
---

{% include image.html
url="http://farm5.staticflickr.com/4054/4387582220_c76e20f5d1.jpg"
description= Earth at night. A spaceship passing by would know immediately that 'something big' was happening. (C) NASA via Flickr.
%}

I have just finished listening to the first episode in a short BBC
[radio series](http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00z763q) on the
[Anthropocene](http://www.anthropocene.info/en/home). [Gaia Vince](http://wanderinggaia.com/)
sets the scene and makes a case for a whole new geological era using
short clips from scientists discussing the huge impact humans have on
this planet. Humans leave clear geological signatures in the Earth's
surface. This is why some geologists argue we are no longer in the
Holocene (the period of relatively stable climate following the end of
the last ice age), but in the Anthropocene (from the Greek _anthropo-_
'human' and _cene_ 'new'), where the human signal is at least as
important as all other influences.




The programme lists some quite astonishing facts. 40% of the ice-free
land area of this planet is used in agriculture. This doesn't even
include the effects embedded or neighbouring ecosystems, like forests,
marshes and rivers. If one includes these that number rises to 75%. We
now shift as much nitrogen from the atmosphere into nitrate fertiliser
as all the bacteria on the planet (and, as the scientists on the
programme points out, there are _a lot _of bacteria). We alter the
hydrological cycle by damming up rivers and preventing sediment
reaching the ocea. We mine 'fossi' water from aquifers. This water
makes it way to the sea and has a significant contribution to sea
level rise (greater than that from the warming water or melting land
ice). We can even match rivers as a force of erosion of the planet's
crust. We extract and shift a greater mass of mineral material than
all the planet's waterways.




Humans are affecting this planet's climate, which is one of the ways
we are making our mark on the geological record. There are proposals
being make to national and international bodies that this new
geological era be officially recognised. In doing so humans would put
themselves in a new position. In acknowledging the influence we have
on this planet we must also acknowledge the responsibilities that come
with it. An anthropocentric view might think of this as managing our
environment in such a way that it can sustain our descendents (this is
more or less the definition of 'sustainable development', a
fashionable term which has somewhat lost its meaning through
repetition).




Most of these huge impacts are inadvertent. Oceanic dead zones caused
by over-fertilisation from nitrates are a byproduct of our
agricultural system. We don't mean to kill off life in the oceans in
this fashion. The same goes for greenhouse gases, which are byproducts
of our demand for energy. Geoengineering - intentional manipulation of
the planet's climate - takes this a step further by adding agency.




The advent of the Anthropocene is a wake-up call to humanity to start
thinking seriously about how it wants this planet to be. Like it or
not we have this influence. It is better to acknowledge it and manage
it than to ignore it.
