---
author: angusferraro
comments: true
date: 2012-09-25 14:55:23+00:00
layout: post
slug: climate-science-what-makes-it-exciting
title: 'Climate science: what makes it exciting?'
wordpress_id: 78
categories:
- popular science
tags:
- climate
---

{% include image.html
url="http://farm5.staticflickr.com/4032/4592600213_52ab6fae79.jpg"
description=(C) Isabelle Adam, Flickr
%}





Public engagement is an obligation for any publicly-funded area of
science, but in climate science the gnarly world of climate policy and
global warming misinformers makes it all the more
important. Scientists are constantly encouraged to ‘communicate’ their
ideas, to present a ‘human face’, and generally spend more time not
doing science.




‘Public engagement’ is a very time-consuming activity because most
scientists only reach small audiences: classrooms, the odd lecture
theatre, a radio programme. When large audiences are on offer - on the
evening news, say - they are generally restricted to a few facile
sound-bites which, when edited, may do more harm than good to the
public understanding of science. It takes a long time and you don’t
get much out of it. The air-time and the audience are so restricted
that the general public both misunderstands what climate science is
and mistrusts climate scientists because they do not get the ‘human
face’ they need.




Compare this situation to that of the most glamorous of the sciences,
cosmology. Carl Sagan and others have had a massive impact on the
public psyche. Sagan's prose was fused with poetry, but some of his
work was done for him because cosmology is a subject which inspires
inherent fascination among the public. It has a lot going for it: the
sheer scales involved, the mysticism. When Sagan declared ‘we’re made
of star-stuff’ he was both stating fact and drawing people into a
inspiring and beautiful worldview. Themes arise which were once
solidly in the realm of religion. Humans crave these themes. Cosmology
is existential and therefore it is exciting.




So what have we discovered from the success of cosmology in engaging
and inspiring the general public? I think there are two main threads:
first, a charismatic presenter who has a way with words; second, a
‘hook’ on which to hang ideas, an inspiring central tenet which the
presenter can use to draw the audience in. Get these two things right
and all of a sudden you can reach much wider audiences and communicate
with them more effectively. Think about the enormous reach and
influence of Sagan’s _Cosmos_ and Brian Cox’s _Wonders of the
Universe_.




Pass someone on the street and ask them to name a climate
scientist. You will almost undoubtedly draw a blank. Perhaps you might
get ‘Al Gore’. The field lacks a public champion. It is difficult to
avoid shallowness as a celebrity scientist. Public adulation can be
seen among the professional scientific community as a cheap way to
gain a reputation at the expense of proper science. But putting this
aside, the effectiveness of such fame is hard to deny.




Now we need a hook. Cosmology has several: themes of the origins of
the universe, the nature of time and space, the (in)significance of
humanity. Climate science has gradual change and noisy datasets. It’s
not immediately inspiring in these terms. Advocacy groups have used
the idea of extreme weather events being linked to climate change to
try to galvanise the public. Now, sometimes in public engagement
inaccuracy can be permitted, but some of the claims of links between
extreme weather and climate change cross the line into deliberate
falsehood. To make these claims is to lose the essence of the
science. It’s time to look elsewhere.




My feeling is the best avenue for a beautiful hook to pin our ideas on
lies in the atmosphere’s ‘swirliness’. The common public perception of
the atmosphere is of a slab, which is not only wrong but also makes it
hard to explain ideas like how the greenhouse effect actually works
using the idea of an effective emitting level. In reality the
atmosphere is a dynamic (everyone likes the word 'dynamic') entity
where blobs of air dance around each other, interacting and mixing and
making their effects felt on the human on the ground. Radiation from
the Sun drives these parcels around.




This hook makes a link between the scientific theory and what we
experience (weather). Cosmology traces a timeline across billions of
years from the origin of the Universe to the development of a
habitable Earth. We can’t quite do things on this scale, but there is
scope here for similar connections between, say, solar heating
anomalies and the weather we experience. In a sense this is the easy
part. The hard part is then linking this to the concept of climate,
and then on to the concept of climate change. One of the more powerful
ideas that comes from the viewpoint of the ‘dance of the air parcels’
is that is addresses the common complaint that global warming can’t be
happening because we had a cold winter. Immediately, present the
public with the idea of this dynamic, ever-changing flow of air across
the globe and it becomes easier to explain how circulation anomalies
can create local temperature anomalies. Again, we have a link between
our hook and some quite important (and accurate) science.




What remains is to find a hook for the concept of energy entering the
climate system. It’s possibly to incorporate it into the ‘dance of the
air parcels’ by explaining how solar energy drives these air parcels,
but also that the total energy in the system can change. There are two
problems here. First, it sounds like only changes in solar output can
drive climate change. Second, it’s not very exciting.




‘Climate’ is a statistical concept around which we have built our
theories. Statistics is a very difficult field to express in layman’s
terms, and still more difficult to express in layman’s terms that a
layman would want to listen to. This is our challenge then: find a
champion, and find something for that champion to talk about. I
haven’t done much in this post beyond issue these two challenges. It
would be great to have a discussion over whether these two challenges
really are the ones we face in public engagement, and if so how we
should meet them.
