---
author: angusferraro
comments: true
date: 2016-03-05 11:49:13+00:00
layout: post
slug: can-stratospheric-aerosols-directly-affect-global-precipitation
title: Can stratospheric aerosols directly affect global precipitation?
wordpress_id: 802
categories:
- my work
- popular science
tags:
- climate
- geoengineering
- modelling
- papers
- precipitation
- radiation
- stratosphere
---

_What is the effect of stratospheric aerosol geoengineering on global
precipitation? If we were to inject sulphate aerosol into the
stratosphere it would reflect some sunlight and cool the Earth, but
the atmosphere's CO2 levels would remain high. This is important,
because CO2 actually has an effect on precipitation even when it
doesn't affect surface temperature. In a recent paper with a summer
student, I've shown the aerosols can contribute a similar effect._


{% include image.html
url="https://angusferraro.files.wordpress.com/2016/02/pra.png"
description="Three climate models (CanESM2, HadGEM2-ES, MPI-ESM-LR)
did simulations of the future with and without geoengineering. The
simulations with stratospheric aerosols (G3 and G4) show greater
temperature-independent precipitation reductions than the simulations
without them (RCP4.5 and G3S)." %}

## Precipitation as energy flow

Precipitation transfers energy from the Earth's surface to its
atmosphere. It takes energy to evaporate water from the surface. Just
as evaporation of sweat from your skin cools you off by taking up heat
from your skin, evaporation from the Earth's surface cools it through
energy transfer. Precipitation occurs when this water condenses out in
the atmosphere. Condensation releases the heat energy stored when the
water evaporated, warming the atmosphere. Globally, precipitation
transfers about
[78 Watts per square metre](http://wec.gsfc.nasa.gov/news/observed-state-energy-budget)
of energy from the surface to the atmosphere. Multiplying that by
global surface area that's a total energy transfer of about 40
petajoules (that's 40 with 15 zeros after it) of energy every second!
To put that in a bit of context, it's about 40% of the amount of
energy the Sun transfers to the Earth's surface.

If precipitation changes, that's the same as saying the atmospheric
energy balance changes. If we warm the atmosphere up, it is able to
radiate more energy (following the Stefan-Boltzmann law). To balance
that, more energy needs to go into the atmosphere. This happens
through precipitation changes.

## Direct effects of gases on precipitation

Now imagine we change the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere. This
decreases the amount of energy the atmosphere emits to space, meaning
the atmosphere has more energy coming in than out. To restore balance
the atmospheric heating from precipitation goes down. This means that
the global precipitation response to global warming from increasing
CO2 has two opposing components: a temperature-independent effect of
the CO2, which decreases precipitation, and a temperature-dependent
effect which arises from the warming the CO2 subsequently causes. In
the long run the temperature-dependent effect is larger. Global
warming will increase global precipitation - although there could be
local increases or decreases.

But what happens if we do geoengineering? Say we get rid of the
temperature-dependent part using aerosols to reduce incoming solar
radiation. The temperature-independent effect of CO2 remains and
global precipitation will go down.

## Detecting the effect of stratospheric aerosol

CO2 isn't the only thing that has a temperature-independent
effect. Any substance that modifies the energy balance of the
atmosphere has one. In our new
[study](http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034012;jsessionid=48C5EA9745D795DC1543D75276D3259C.c3.iopscience.cld.iop.org),
we ask whether stratospheric sulphate aerosol has a detectable effect
on global precipitation. Theoretically it makes sense, but it is
difficult to detect because usually there are temperature-dependent
effects obscuring it.

We used a common method to remove the temperature-dependent effect. We
calculated the precipitation change for a given surface temperature
change from a separate simulation, then used this to remove the
temperature-dependent effect in climate model simulations of the
future. We did this for future scenarios with and without
geoengineering.

As expected, we found a temperature-independent influence which
reduced precipitation. Importantly, this effect was bigger when
geoengineering aerosols were present in the stratosphere. This was
detectable in three different climate models. The figure above shows
this. The non-geoengineered 'RCP4.5' simulation shows a precipitation
decline when the temperature effect is removed. This comes mainly from
the CO2.  The 'G3' and 'G4' geoengineering simulations (blue and green
lines) have an even greater decline. The aerosol is acting to decrease
precipitation further.

## How does aerosol affect precipitation?

The temperature-independent effect wasn't present when geoengineering
was done by 'dimming the Sun'. The 'G3S' simulation  (orange lines in
the figure) does this, and it has a similar precipitation change to
RCP4.5. So what causes the precipitation reduction when stratospheric
aerosols are used? We calculated the effect of the aerosol on the
energy budget of the troposphere (where the precipitation occurs). We
separated this in two: the aerosol itself, and the stratospheric
warming that occurs because of the effect of the aerosol on the
stratosphere's energy budget.

{% include image.html
url="https://angusferraro.files.wordpress.com/2016/02/est_dp.png"
description="Black bars show the temperature-independent precipitation changes
simulated by the models. Orange bars show our calculation of the
effect of the stratospheric warming. Green bars show our calculation
of effect of the aerosol itself. Grey bars show our calculation of the
total effect, which is very close to the actual simulated result." %}

We found the main effect was from the aerosol itself. The aerosol's
main effect is to reduce incoming solar radiation and cool the
surface. But we showed it also interferes a little with the radiation
escaping to space, and this alters the energy balance of the
troposphere. The precipitation has to respond to these energy balance
changes.

This effect is not huge. We had to use many model simulations of the
21st Century to detect it above the 'noise' of internal
variability. In the real world we only have one 'simulation', so this
implies the temperature-independent effect of stratospheric aerosol on
precipitation would not be detectable in real-world moderate
geoengineering scenario. This also means climate model simulations not
including the effects of the aerosol could capture much of the effects
of geoengineering on the global hydrological cycle.

This effect could be more important under certain circumstances. If
geoengineering was more extreme, with more aerosol injected for
longer, precipitation would decrease more. But, based on these
results, the main effect of geoengineering on precipitation is that
the temperature-dependent changes are minimised. This means the
temperature-independent effect of increasing CO2 concentrations is
unmasked, reducing precipitation.

Take a look at the paper for more details - it's open access!

_Ferraro, A. J., & Griffiths, H. G. (2016). Quantifying the
temperature-independent effect of stratospheric aerosol geoengineering
on global-mean precipitation in a multi- model ensemble. Environmental
Research Letters,
11, 034012. doi:[10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034012](http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034012)._

* * *

_On a personal note, this paper is significant because it is the
culmination of the first research project I truly led.  Of course I
managed my own research as a PhD student and post-doc, but my
supervisors secured the funding. They also acted as
collaborators. Here I came up with the idea, applied for funding,
supervised Hannah (the excellent student who did much of the analysis)
and wrote up the results. It's a milestone on the way to becoming an
independent scientific researcher. For this reason this work will
always be special to me. Thanks also to Hannah for being such a good
student!_
